Further reading
===============

To learn more about historical epidemics
----------------------------------------

The 1918 or "Spanish" flu is very much in the news at close to its
centenary. Laura Spinney's treatment is definitive {cite}`Spi18`.

The Black Death of the fourteenth century has had a huge number of
histories written about it -- and to show that history is a process
and not a state, is still generating new works that encourage us to
revisit both the sociology and the science. Hatcher explores it from
the perspective of a village {cite}`Hat09`, while Sloane deals with
a capital city {cite}`Slo11`. An accessible scientific treatment is still
waiting to be written.



Popular treatments of network science
-------------------------------------

As well as being one of the scientific pioneers, Albert-L\'aszl\'o
Barab\'asi has written extensively and accessibly about complex
networks and their applications. His book *Linked: the new science of
networks* {cite}`Bar03` is probably the best-known introductory work,
with the follow-up on "bursty" processes {cite}`Bar11` also well worth
reading.

For a more social science perspective, Watts' book on small worlds
{cite}`Wat99` explores issue such as rumour spreading and the ways in
which different social structures can be understood mathematically.


Textbooks and reference works on network science
------------------------------------------------

The absolute best textbook on the mathematics of networks is that by
Newman, another pioneer of the field {cite}`New10`. Sayama deals with
networks as part of a wider introduction to modelling complex systems
{cite}`Say15`. Porter and Gleeson have produced a freely-available
tutorial {cite}`PG14`. Kiss, Miller, and Simon's book on epidemic
spreading on networks is probably the most comprehensive recent
mathematical treatment, and has some associated Python code
{cite}`KMS17`.


